For more than 100 years,
Jehovah’s Witnesses
have proclaimed the Bible’s message
that God’s Kingdom
will rid the world of wickedness,
restore the earth to Paradise,
and raise mankind to perfection.
Sharing this truth, however,
has often resulted in persecution
from powerful institutions.
But why has such a positive message
elicited such a negative reaction?
And how have we overcome that opposition
to get to where we are today?
This is the story of a people
intent on living in the light of Bible truth,
no matter what hostility they may face.
As you watch, note the determination
of Jehovah’s modern-day servants
to study diligently, preach zealously,
and keep serving God faithfully.
This video is more than just history.
This is your story.
It’s a reminder that Jehovah God
is in full control
and that this is his organization.
It is a story that begins
over 6,000 years ago
—the story of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
In the Bible, light is associated with truth,
whereas darkness
is associated with falsehood.
When God completed his creative works,
there was no spiritual darkness.
But after Adam and Eve sinned,
human society
came under the control of Satan.
Shunning the light
would become
the foremost goal of wicked people.
Anyone seeking truth in such a world
would be opposed.
The light of truth shone brightly
when Jesus Christ walked the earth.
All who truly followed Jesus
reflected the light he radiated.
But Jesus foretold
that after the death of his apostles,
there would be
a falling away from pure worship.
That apostasy would be so extensive
that genuine disciples
would practically disappear
until “the conclusion
of the system of things.”
At the same time,
a counterfeit form of Christianity
would flourish.
And so it happened.
So-called Christian churches
deviated from Christ’s teachings.
The result was
the abuse of power
and untold suffering.
This was a period of deep darkness.
In the centuries after the establishment
of the Christian congregation,
we see how many of those
who were taking the lead
in the Christian church
(or, the Christian congregation)
likewise started to love worldly wisdom.
These ideas that came from Plato
and other Greek philosophers
started to infiltrate
the so-called Christian thinking.
And so the apostates
wished to blend
Christian teaching and Christian tradition
with pagan religious ideas.
The idea was to make these things
more acceptable to other pagans
so that pagans could be drawn
into the Christian religion.
As the centuries passed,
apostate religious leaders
obscured the light even further
by keeping the Bible in Latin,
a language no longer understood
by most people.
Yet, at certain points during this darkness,
there were still individuals
who felt keenly the need
to read and understand God’s Word.
For example, in the 1100’s,
a French merchant known as Vaudès
commissioned a translation of Bible books
into the language of the common people.
Two centuries later,
Catholic priest John Wycliffe
wrote powerfully
against unbiblical practices of the church.
I demand you explain yourself!
By 1382, Wycliffe’s team
released the first translation
of the Bible into English.
His students, known as Lollards,
preached the Bible’s message
to anyone who would listen.
By 1495, the invention of movable type
made it possible
to print all or part of the Bible
in 12 languages.
“Our Father which art in heaven . . . “
Soon, people were reading it for themselves.
And some who did began to discern
that the church had gone off course.
In the 1500’s, such men as Huldrych Zwingli,
Martin Luther,
and John Calvin
preached the need to return
to the original principles of Christianity.
These men and others
tried to expose hypocritical practices
and uphold Bible teachings,
even though this put them at odds
with powerful religious authorities.
You can see ones
that were willing
to stand out as being different
even though they didn’t have
a full knowledge of the truth.
But standing out led to persecution,
and persecution often led to compromise,
especially when it came to preaching.
Nevertheless, in many lands,
the 1600’s and 1700’s
were marked
by a strong upsurge in Bible study.
In England, many learned men
refuted the Trinity doctrine as unscriptural,
among them scientist Sir Isaac Newton,
poet John Milton,
and chemist Joseph Priestley.
Besides rejecting the Trinity doctrine,
Priestley declared that the teaching
of the inherent immortality of the soul
was false.
He held that the first-century Christians
had the true faith
and that any change to that pattern of belief
was a corruption.
His opinions sparked a heated controversy
—both in the church and in the government.
In 1791,
a mob destroyed
Priestley’s house and laboratory.
The pressure mounted for three more years
until he fled to the United States.
He was followed
by many others who held his views,
among them Henry Grew.
By 1807, at age 25,
Grew was invited to serve as pastor
of the Baptist Church
in Hartford, Connecticut.
And he had a very interesting philosophy
on the study of the Bible:
Let Scripture interpret Scripture.
Grew’s point was that the Bible
was its own best interpreter.
Now, as he studied the Bible,
he began to realize
that the doctrine of the Trinity was false.
Well, you couldn’t be a Baptist minister
and not believe in the Trinity.
After four years,
Grew and several others
withdrew from the church.
In later years, Grew published writings
in which he used the Bible
to refute the Trinity, hellfire,
and the inherent immortality of the soul.
And Grew argued that immortality
according to the Bible
is a gift that God bestows on the faithful.
It is not a gift
that he bestows on the wicked.
So how could the wicked
have an immortal soul?
Grew’s pamphlet
would have far-reaching effects.
His work caught the attention
of Methodist minister George Storrs.
Intrigued, Storrs spent
the next three years studying the matter.
The Scriptures are clear on this point . . .
Yet, his findings met
with little interest by his fellow ministers.
In Ezekiel 18:4:
“The soul that sinneth, it shall die.”
And finally, by 1840,
his conscience troubled him so much
over the differences
between what the Bible teaches
and what he was being obliged to teach
as a Methodist Episcopal minister
that he resigned his position.
In 1842, Storrs began publishing
a monthly magazine entitled Bible Examiner.
Before long, he met Henry Grew in person.
The two became close friends
and collaborated in debates
against proponents
of the immortal soul doctrine.
Yes, and that scripture, Ezekiel 18:4,
that one I thought was . . .
George Storrs believed
that in order for everyone living
during the time of Christ’s return
to have an opportunity for salvation,
a global preaching campaign was needed.
He had no idea how such a thing
could be accomplished,
but in faith he wrote:
Yet, too many,
if they cannot see
just how a thing is to be done,
reject it as if it were impossible for God.
Storrs died in 1879
at his home in Brooklyn, New York,
in the very neighborhood
that would become the focal point
of the worldwide preaching work
he had so eagerly anticipated.
The stage was now set
for light to emerge from darkness.
It was in 1845
that Joseph and Ann Eliza Russell
emigrated from Ireland
to Pennsylvania, U.S.A.
They would have five children,
among them Charles Taze.
But times were hard.
His brother Thomas died at age five.
Before Charles turned nine,
two more of his siblings died.
Then his mother died.
It’s OK, Son.
Everything is going to be all right.
That same year
—1861—
the United States
became embroiled in a civil war
that would send 618,000 to their graves.
Thousands perished on battlefields
not far from where
the Russells lived and worked.
They would be able to see firsthand
the havoc that war wreaks on people
—the suffering, the death.
Young Charles Russell thought often
about what happens to the dead.
Most religions held
that God created man immortal
and that He made a fiery hell
in which to torment people forever
—except for those predestined for salvation.
Russell’s feelings about such teachings
came through in what he wrote.
A God that would use his power
to create human beings
whom he foreknew and predestinated
should be eternally tormented
could be neither wise, just,
nor loving.
His standard would be lower
than that of many men.
He could never reconcile
the teaching of eternal torment
with the description in the Bible
of a loving God.
As he examined the creeds
of the great churches,
when he saw that they taught
that the wicked are tormented eternally,
why, he just could not accept that!
The whole culture,
the religious culture at that time,
was a matter of believing
that God was a God of vengeance.
And Russell knew that the Bible said,
as it does at 1 John 4:8: “God is love.”
How could a God of love do this?
And so his faith wavered.
He felt that he could do
the most good for people
through business and philanthropy.
As a preteen,
he became his father’s partner
in a growing chain of clothing stores.
Charles Russell enlarged the business,
eventually operating
a number of stores by himself.
Here’s your change.
Thank you for coming.
By age 25, he possessed
over three hundred thousand dollars,
the equivalent
of seven million dollars today.
Yet, his search for truth continued.
In 1869, something happened
that would help reestablish his faith.
Seemingly by accident one evening,
I dropped into
a dusty, dingy hall
to see if the handful who met there
had anything more sensible to offer
than the creeds of the great churches.
Let us take note of the words
of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus himself,
to the apostles in . . .
There, for the first time,
I heard something of the views
of Second Adventists
from the preacher Mr. Jonas Wendell.
“And he said unto them, . . .”
Though his Scripture exposition
was not entirely clear,
it was sufficient, under God,
to reestablish my wavering faith
in the divine inspiration of the Bible.
Now, remember at this point,
Russell is not an atheist
but he’s just discouraged.
He doesn’t feel
the truth can be found anywhere.
And that sermon by a Second Adventist
was enough to get him to take
his well-worn Bible off the shelf
and to start digging again.
As we’ve already seen, the word “Trinity”
doesn’t appear anywhere in the Bible.
Fired with enthusiasm, Charles;
his father, Joseph;
and a few acquaintances
in Pittsburgh and Allegheny
formed a class for Bible study.
They would take a subject.
They would get a Bible concordance.
They would look up every single scripture
that had a bearing on the subject.
And then they would write down
their conclusions.
And then they would say: ‘All right.
This is what the Bible teaches.
We are going to believe this.’
Yes, and God’s Word is clear.
After five years of study,
the religious thinking of these men
had undergone remarkable change.
Christ’s return
will mean great blessings . . .
Their study of the Bible
led them to major conclusions
that challenged
the prevailing religious views of the day.
For example, while most religions
taught that man has a soul,
Russell and his associates concluded
that man is a soul and that the soul can die.
And, whereas
Christendom’s churches teach
that the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost are one person,
these students held that Jehovah is one God
and not part of a Trinity.
In addition, while some churches
were teaching
that Christ would return in the flesh
and that the earth would be destroyed,
this small group came to understand
that Christ would return invisibly
—in the spirit—
with the purpose
of blessing obedient mankind.
So it wasn’t just philosophizing,
just talking about
‘what if’ or ‘perhaps this way,’
but they were focused
on actually trying to find the truth.
And, the fact that they decided
to write down those conclusions showed
that they had a belief
that there is some truth to be found.
We see light only
when it’s Jehovah’s time to reveal light.
And so this was the beginning
of Jehovah’s time
to lead his people out of darkness
into the wonderful light.
Charles Russell
never professed to be divinely inspired.
He acknowledged the assistance
he had received
from Jonas Wendell,
from George Storrs,
and from someone who also brought about
one of his greatest tests of faith,
Nelson Barbour,
publisher of the journal
Herald of the Morning.
On a business trip,
Russell received a copy of the Herald.
Its contents were a surprise.
Like Russell, Barbour held
that Christ’s return would be invisible.
Russell arranged a meeting with Barbour.
Soon, Russell’s Bible study group of about 30
merged with Barbour’s larger group.
Russell contributed funds
to print Herald of the Morning.
The business is an excellent one!
By this time,
Russell began
to sell out his business interests
in order to preach full-time.
Yes, and all that is needed from me
is to leave this business behind
and start a new life.
There you are.
Thank you.
And I wish you well in your new endeavors.
He was convinced
that the presence of the Lord
is of utmost importance.
The presence of Christ is not compared
to the Flood but to the days of Noah.
At the age of 25,
he went from city to city
to speak at various public gatherings,
on the streets,
and to Protestant churches
and their clergy.
He didn’t want to form another church.
There were already enough denominations,
in his mind.
There he presented
these main Bible teachings to them
and urged them to study the matter
and then to use their pulpits
to preach that message.
But, of course, they laughed
and made fun of him and went their way.
And then that’s why Russell decided,
‘Well, somebody has to preach these things.’
So he would use
his time and energies to do it.
You would assume that being well-off,
he could have supported someone else.
He could have taken the easy way out
and perhaps have funded
someone else to do the work.
He allowed his whole life
to center around it.
By selling his business
and getting involved personally with it,
you can see the passion,
the love, that he had for the truth.
Here’s your mail, Mr. Russell.
Thank you.
After two years of association
with Nelson Barbour,
a dispute arose that would test the loyalty
of each member of the Bible study group.
Barbour had written an article for the Herald
spurning the teaching
that Christ’s death could provide
a ransom for sinners.
Though professing to believe in the ransom,
Barbour wrote that the notion
that Christ’s death paid for mankind’s sins
was “unscriptural,
and obnoxious to all our ideas of justice.”
Russell, his young coeditor, disagreed.
Through the pages of the Herald,
Russell went to great lengths
to defend this Bible truth.
Unpleasant though it be,
I feel it necessary to take exception
to an article by my brother
on this subject.
I make the objection,
not from a spirit of controversy,
but because I believe the doctrine
assailed in that article
to be one of the most important teachings
of God’s Word.
Jesus Christ by the grace of God
tasted death for every man.
In the Herald, Barbour fired back.
I tell you such a theology is false,
and such justice an abhorrence
to the principle of right and wrong.
Dismayed by Barbour’s refusal
to accept this Scriptural teaching,
Russell asked him privately either to resign
or to sell his share of the paper.
While I still feel
that you are a brother in Christ,
the points of variance seem to me
to be so fundamental
and important
that full fellowship
no longer obtains between you and me.
I feel that our relationship should cease.
After months of controversy,
Russell’s group withdrew from Barbour’s.
Eventually, Russell
severed all ties with Herald of the Morning.
Brother Russell
realized that he could not restore
this man’s wavering faith,
in fact, lack of faith.
And so he took it as the Lord’s will
that he begin to publish another magazine,
Zion’s Watch Tower
and Herald of Christ’s Presence
—first issue, July 1879.
In the same year that Thomas Edison
patented the electric light,
Charles Russell had gone
from student to publisher.
Thus dawned a new era
of both literal and spiritual light.
From its first installment,
Zion’s Watch Tower
championed firm belief in the ransom.
Many who had associated with Nelson Barbour
sided with Russell on this issue.
In 1879 and 1880,
Russell and the readers of Zion’s Watch Tower
formed 30 congregations.
Those who joined them
became known simply
as the Bible Students.
People who love the truth
want to have answers,
answers to questions:
Who is God? Why are we here?
Where are we going?
And they’re disillusioned
by what they see in the churches.
And so they’re searching,
and so they found something.
Next, Russell and other dedicated Christians
established a nonprofit Bible society
to enable them to give wider distribution
to Bible literature in various languages.
From the very beginning,
it was agreed
that there would never be
any begging or petitioning for money.
The work would always be advanced
through voluntary donations.
With the annual commemoration
of Christ’s death
came opportunities to hold large conventions.
In time, these were held regularly.
Christian baptism was customary.
The Bible Students sought to adhere
to the Scriptural command
to ‘not forsake the assembling
of themselves together.’
Another arrangement
that intended to encourage
the small but growing
number of Bible Students
came in 1894.
Traveling representatives, called pilgrims,
were dispatched to conduct meetings
and to assist these fledgling congregations.
About that time,
Russell began to publish books
containing the results
of his Biblical research,
eventually writing six volumes.
These books came to be known as
Studies in the Scriptures.
As people read these books,
they were moved
to share with others what they learned.
Obviously, people
who were honesthearted
could hear the ring of truth.
They just saw that this is the truth.
And it was quite different
from what other Christian denominations
were teaching.
The impact of these volumes on the people
was that some
immediately changed things in their lives.
The Bible Students were putting into practice
what they were learning from the Scriptures.
In 1881,
the article “Wanted 1,000 Preachers”
invited readers of Zion’s Watch Tower
to distribute Bible literature publically.
Some full-time preachers
—called colporteurs—
preached from house to house,
bringing the message
directly to people’s homes.
The July 1881 Watch Tower
reminded readers that all true Christians
have a responsibility to preach.
They knew this was the truth,
and they were telling people about it.
Just as every individual Witness today
knows he has the truth
and he has to tell the people around him
—that’s what it amounts to.
In 1899, Zion’s Watch Tower
proposed a new method of preaching
—handing publications to people
after they left church on Sunday.
At one stage, Russell
endeavored to talk to the religious leaders.
He could see then that there wasn’t a chance
to help modify those church systems,
but rather it was more important
to approach people on an individual basis
and give them the opportunity.
You can imagine the reaction,
the feelings of those who would come out.
They had gone
to an established church or religion;
they had seen a man who,
in their view, perhaps has been educated
and knows what he’s talking about.
They go outside,
and here are humble people
trying to tell them something
from the Scriptures.
I don’t think our work
was ever intended to be confrontational,
but it was to draw attention to the message.
Confrontation came because we were there,
because we were doing the work.
But the idea was to draw attention
to what the message from the Bible is.
These booklets and tracts exposed
the church’s departure
from Bible teachings.
And they infuriated Christendom’s clergy.
Now this affected
the money that was coming
into many churches.
Because once people saw the truth
and saw that they had been taught falsehood,
it was only logical that they would withdraw
and would not give their support
to religious institutions
that were teaching falsehood.
In 1903, Pittsburgh’s Carnegie Hall
became the scene of a six-day debate.
E. L. Eaton,
pastor of a Methodist-Episcopal church
and representing an alliance
of Protestant clergymen, had one aim
—to destroy Russell’s influence,
particularly with regard to his teachings
about the condition of the dead.
They really wanted to expose Russell
as a man who was ignorant of the Bible
and a fraud who wasn’t qualified
to get on a platform and preach
about Bible subjects.
Russell really did a very good job
of presenting his arguments
and establishing Bible truths,
showing he was very qualified
to deal with Scripture.
People had a chance
not only to see the contrast between the two
but had a chance to see that Bible truths
were clear on many of those points.
It was reported that one clergyman
who had been there to support Eaton
came up to Russell afterward and said:
“I am glad to see you turn the hose on hell
and put out the fire.”
The local newspaper published
a full account
of each debate the following day.
And then the brothers got the idea,
why not have Brother Russell
have a sermon printed each week
in the newspapers simultaneously?
They, in turn,
would telegraph the sermons out
to all the newspapers in the United States,
Canada, and even parts of Europe.
Russell’s sermons
could be found in 2,000 newspapers,
reaching 15 million readers.
The message was spreading quickly,
but the Bible Students were determined
that it should penetrate
to all corners of the earth.
To that end, Russell prepared
an even more intensive campaign.
Up to 1908,
the work had been directed
from Russell’s hometown,
now a part of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
But to accomplish
a more extensive, international work,
the headquarters,
known as the Bible House, was far too small.
In 1908,
Russell dispatched
J. F. Rutherford and others to New York City
to secure more suitable quarters.
The place was named Bethel,
meaning “House of God.”
Those who lived there
were called the Bethel family,
each a volunteer,
each working vigorously
to shine the Bible’s light
into all the earth.
As far back as 1891,
Russell and some associates
had been traveling to other lands
to help people spiritually.
Brothers, I would like
to take our preaching worldwide.
One 17,000-mile journey
took them to Europe, Asia, and Africa.
One of the results of that trip was this:
There was a need seen for publications
in various languages.
Not long after he would visit a place,
you could see these groups of Bible Students
start to spring up.
The work was starting to go international.
But during the years 1909 through 1912,
Russell intensified his efforts,
traveling across Europe,
the Middle East,
and eventually around the world.
His travels enabled him
to observe millions of people
and to see firsthand
what it would really mean
to let the light of truth
shine into all the earth.
By 1914, there were 5,000 Bible Students
preaching in 68 lands.
The world’s population
was approaching two billion.
Was there a way
to reach more people in less time?
New technologies had opened up a possibility.
The “Photo-Drama of Creation”
is presented by the IBSA,
the International Bible Students Association.
Its aim is public instruction
along religio-scientific lines
and in defense of the Bible
as the inspired Word of God.
The Bible Students did something
that had never been done before.
By synchronizing slides and film footage
with music and dialogue, they produced
an eight-hour audiovisual presentation.
The idea was
to show the development of God’s purpose
from the beginning of creation
to the Millennial Reign of Christ.
It was shown in two-hour segments
over four nights.
The first part
dealt with each of the creative days,
the Flood of Noah’s day,
and the faith of Abraham.
Part 2 showed scenes
of God’s dealings with ancient Israel,
from the Exodus
through the reign of the Judean kings.
The third segment dealt
with the destruction of Solomon’s temple
and Messianic prophecies
and their fulfillment.
In Part 4, viewers saw the story
of the spread of Christianity,
the persecution that resulted,
and the huge populations
yet to be reached with the Kingdom message.
Showings were organized
so that 80 cities could be served each day.
The Bible Students themselves
paid all expenses needed
to rent suitable theaters.
The “Photo-Drama of Creation”
was a technical feat previously unmatched.
It would be another decade
before a full-length commercial film
would combine music,
synchronized dialogue,
and color footage.
In just one year,
nine million people around the earth
had seen the “Photo-Drama of Creation.”
And many who saw it
were convinced that they had discovered
the path of increasing light.
In 1876, Russell had written an article
in Bible Examiner
entitled “Gentile Times: When Do They End?”
in which he stated
that the “seven times” will end in 1914.
Russell concluded
on the basis of the tree dream
recorded in Daniel chapter 4
that the dynasty that began with King David
would be restored
2,520 years after its overthrow.
During those years,
no Davidic king would rule.
The Bible Students referred to that period
as “the Gentile Times.”
What would happen at the end of those years?
They reasoned that since Jesus
is the only one qualified
to assume the throne of David,
then Christ himself
would begin ruling in 1914.
What would that mean for the earth?
Reasoning on Daniel chapter 2
and Matthew chapter 24,
the Bible Students preached
that a time of global anarchy would come,
which would culminate
in the end of the system of things.
They believed that about that time,
the congregation would be taken to heaven.
They realized that 1914 had a significance,
that it meant the end of the Gentile Times.
Now, at that time, they felt
that perhaps the work would be finished
and that they would go home, as it were.
So they were looking forward
to a time of reward.
They did understand
that there was a significance to the year.
Primarily, they thought that 1914
would just be the start
of the judgment
coming upon the world, or Armageddon.
Yet, people in general
were anticipating a different sort of future.
Many who wrote memoirs
about the summer of 1914
described it
as one of “exceptional tranquility,”
“full of hope and promise.”
Some analysts felt that in 1914,
conditions were better than ever
for achieving world peace.
What the Bible Students had been preaching
about global anarchy
seemed highly unlikely.
But the Bible Students
counted the days and continued working.
Then, on June 28, 1914,
Austria-Hungary’s crown prince
and his wife were murdered.
His assassin fired the shots
that began the bloodiest war
mankind had yet experienced.
Notions of tranquility were shattered
as nation after nation became enmeshed
in “the Great War.”
These and other historical events
matched what Jesus said would characterize
“the conclusion of the system of things.”
When World War I broke out in July,
they felt vindicated.
It strengthened their faith in the Bible,
in Jehovah’s prophetic Word,
but also, it enhanced their trust
that Jehovah was using
Brother Russell and his friends
to explain truth to others.
At Brooklyn Bethel on October 2, 1914,
Charles Russell
made a monumental announcement.
The Gentile Times have ended;
their kings have had their day!
Expectations were still running high.
Many of the Bible Students were hoping
for an immediate heavenly reward.
Now I just might say that my mother,
she was ready to sell up
everything in the home
because she thought
that the end was coming in 1914,
and her feelings were that
of a lot of the brothers back there.
Despite such expectations,
the distressing world conditions
that erupted in 1914
would not mean
that the Bible Students’ job was done.
Russell felt sure that a great work remained.
He wrote:
We should lose no time
dreaming that the door is shut!
There are people who are seeking the Truth
—people who are sitting in darkness.
—The Watch Tower,  February 15, 1915.
Yet, Russell
would not personally reach those people.
In 1916, in the course of a preaching tour,
he died at the age of 64.
He had spent his entire fortune
preaching the Bible’s message.
Whereas the majority of the Bible Students
kept studying the Bible
and sharing its message,
others simply could not overcome
their disappointments
—disappointment that 1914
did not fulfill all their expectations
compounded by natural grief
over Russell’s death.
Well, it was a big shock
because they were used to
his taking the lead,
and they figured
he was going to take the lead
until the Lord came
and took them all to heaven.
And they just
didn’t know what to do for a while.
They were totally shocked
as to how to carry on.
Some would sever all association
with the Bible Students
and attempt to draw others after them.
What would happen to the Bible Students?
Would they disperse
as if followers of Russell?
This is not a work of man.
This is a work of Jehovah God.
It’s evident that Jehovah
had already chosen this organization
because of the faithfulness and the sincerity
of the men who were behind it.
It was obvious that Jehovah
had already chosen this organization
to get his work done.
There were enough honesthearted men
hungering for the truth,
desirous of doing the will of God,
to prevent the organization from collapsing.
Rather than giving in to disappointment
over what did not happen in 1914,
the Bible Students kept their minds open
to the significance of what had taken place.
The world war and its aftermath
had become the world-shaking events
proclaimed by Russell
almost 40 years earlier.
The Bible Students
were coming to the realization
that Christ’s presence had begun in 1914,
and that the world’s last days were underway!
Two months after Russell’s death,
Joseph Rutherford
was appointed to oversee the work.
Rutherford had been
a close associate of Russell,
traveling with him
and speaking in his defense.
Like Russell, he believed
that the good news had to be preached.
He was dynamic
and could not be intimidated.
Yet, not everyone appreciated these traits
—even among the Bible Students.
Brother Rutherford,
he was an entirely different personality,
brusque in manner,
and he didn’t fear to tread on anyone’s toes.
I think this was a tremendous test
on the brothers
because they really
had been worshipping the creature
more than the Creator.
Rutherford directed that Russell’s notes
for a seventh volume
of Studies in the Scriptures
be compiled into a new book
called The Finished Mystery.
On the day that the book was completed
and he had a supply in his office,
he arranged for brothers to put one
at each place
at the tables in the dining room.
And so, when the family came down to eat,
each one had a copy
of the book The Finished Mystery.
Some were quite curious about it
and wondered what it was all about
and enthused about it.
But there was already
a growing tension in the family
because some of the responsible brothers
sort of resented Brother Rutherford.
Some of them had ambitions for themselves.
So they used the occasion to bring
accusations against Brother Rutherford
for having gone ahead and published this
without their permission and their knowledge.
And the result was, eventually,
about a five-hour tirade
against Brother Rutherford,
where a number brought
a lot of unjust accusations against him.
Brother Macmillan tells that, well, that day,
they left the dining room
and most of the food was uneaten
and the family was very sad.
But in the community at large,
people were taking note
of The Finished Mystery.
They originally planned on a distribution
of about less than a hundred thousand.
And, within a short time,
over 850,000 copies had to be printed.
The clergy hated the book!
It exposed
their unscriptural teachings and practices.
And it publicly condemned them
for their involvement in the world war.
The clergy fought back!
Using the heightened patriotism of wartime
to their advantage,
they falsely accused the Bible Students
of sedition,
espionage,
and treason,
and they urged the U.S. government
to halt their work.
On May 8, 1918,
Joseph Rutherford and seven of his associates
were arrested.
On June 20, they were convicted
on four counts of sedition.
July 4, 1918,
Rutherford and his associates
were transported
to the federal penitentiary
in Atlanta, Georgia.
The sentence?
Twenty years in prison:
George Fisher,
Hugh Macmillan,
Robert Martin,
Frederick Robison,
Joseph Rutherford,
William Van Amburgh,
Clayton Woodworth.
Sentenced to ten years in prison:
Giovanni DeCecca.
It was quite a shock to them
to be put in prison.
Did they do something
that they shouldn’t have done?
Was the Lord displeased with them?
Or was the Lord permitting it?
They just didn’t know.
The Devil stirs up people
to oppose us either directly or indirectly.
Now, the charge of sedition is one
that has often been used
against Jehovah’s people.
This is just another ploy.
Those brothers
certainly were not going around
trying to undermine the U.S. government.
On August 26, 1918,
Brooklyn headquarters was shut down.
Operations were moved back to Pittsburgh.
In the minds of the clergy,
the voice of the Bible Students
had been silenced.
On November 11, 1918, the world war ended.
Prisoners of war were being released;
Rutherford and his associates were not.
It appeared
that their opponents had succeeded.
The Bible Students circulated a petition
for the release of the eight men
and obtained 700,000 signatures!
On March 12, 1919,
Woodrow Wilson,
president of the United States,
conceded that the prison terms
were excessive.
On March 26, all eight men were released.
The charges were later dropped.
The Lord was preparing them for the future.
It was going to be a battle
with the political, religious,
and commercial world,
and Brother Rutherford
was geared up and trained for that
after he got out.
Upon their release,
the men were consumed with zeal.
Within six months,
headquarters was moved back to Brooklyn
and arrangements were made
for a convention at Cedar Point, Ohio.
It was here that they launched
a companion magazine to The Watch Tower
called The Golden Age.
Its purpose?
To explain the meaning of world events
and to inspire hope in the supreme remedy.
Rutherford and his associates
had only just been released from prison.
And then within a couple of months,
they organized this tremendous convention,
and then announced the release
of a new magazine—The Golden Age.
Now, that’s something
that really is unbelievable.
You go from one situation
where there is hardly anything happening.
The next thing, it’s just full speed ahead.
On September 8, 1922,
another convention was held at Cedar Point.
Here, Rutherford gave what would become
perhaps his most memorable speech.
Do you believe that the King of glory
has begun his reign?
Yes!
Then back to the field!
The world must know
that Jehovah is God
and that Jesus Christ
is King of kings
and Lord of lords.
This is the day of all days.
Behold, the King reigns!
You are his publicity agents.
Therefore advertise,
advertise,
advertise, the King and his kingdom.
And “advertise” they did.
Well, it must have been daunting
for them to contemplate the world
as their territory
with a few thousand harvest workers.
They knew Jehovah would help them;
they knew others would join them.
So they knew the work would expand.
You could imagine someone
sitting there and saying,
‘How on earth would you ever get this done?’
And that would seem to be
quite a sensible question.
But those brothers
weren’t concerned with that.
They had full faith in Jehovah.
Well, our focus at the time
in view of Brother Rutherford’s talk
was that we’ve got something to do
and we’ve got to finish a work
that we’ve been entrusted with.
And our focus was to get on with the job
and fulfill our commission
as his servants here on the earth.
Like some who had gone before them,
these students of the Bible
had the courage
to walk away from false beliefs.
Yet, they were different
in that they stuck together.
And they refused to stop preaching,
even in the face of serious opposition.
Because of their endurance,
they continued to know the profound joy
of having emerged from darkness.
Now a huge work lay ahead of them.
Their future would be one
of increasing sacrifice
and great accomplishment.
But their faith that Christ had begun ruling,
coupled with their appreciation
for Jehovah’s direction and backing
gave them the courage they would need
to let the light of truth shine
into all the earth.